# scRNA-seq Analysis of an Emerging Model Species: Insights into an Underexplored Organism. 

### Establishing cellular taxonomy and deciphering the molecular makeup of the cell types using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)

Mapping genotypes into phenotypes is the primary focus and a long-standing challenge in cellular and evolutionary developmental biology. In any multicellular organism, most cells contain the same genome, but the unique molecular instructions encrypted within the individual cells result in cell-to-cell gene expression variability. This unique molecular instruction is a set of genes induced together as a gene expression program (GEP) through complex transcriptional co-regulation to establish and maintain a cell's identity and distinguish one individual cell from another. The diverse array of cells with unique transcriptional signatures, determining their identity and function, is the foundation of multicellular organisms. These unique gene expression patterns between individual cells translate to differences at the protein level between different cell types, resulting in a vast array of cellular phenotypes throughout the body. Many of the characteristic traits in an organism can be attributable to the functions of highly specialized cell types. With the recent advancement in single-cell RNA sequencing technology (scRNA-seq), it became possible to conduct high-resolution phenotyping experiments for complex samples.

The ability of single-cell transcriptomics to dissect gene expression at the cellular level of thousands of individual cells or even hundreds of thousands of cells has revolutionized the fields of cell and developmental biology. These technologies have been well-adopted in human and animal studies to study different tissues and even whole organisms, discovering common and new cell types, and identifying previously unattainable cell populations. We are witnessing a significant enrichment of informative cell-type atlases, such as brain, retina, and immune cells, dramatically boosting biomedical research. Single-cell transcriptomics has the potential to provide invaluable insight into how evolutionary forces act at the cellular level and shape transcriptome variation between species and will further our understanding of the evolutionary origins of organisms and cellular diversity. The scRNA-seq datasets enable us to compare the whole transcriptome of individual cells, which can address the fundamental biological questions about the origins of cellular diversity and the evolutionary mechanisms that have shaped cellular form and function.

An undercharacterized species, closely related to a model organism with a simple phenotype, offers the ideal genetic system to study the genetic basis for phenotypic diversity. The complex phenotype of this undercharacterized species is associated with the interplay of two growth modes modulated by project-specific interested transcription factors. These two developmental regulators are expressed in different domains of the developing organ of an undercharacterized species. The project-specific interested transcription factor is responsible for the emergence of unique morphological structures by broadening organ-wide growth relative to edge patterning. In contrast, the other transcription factor inhibits growth locally around these structures. Interestingly, this transcription factor is expressed in the embryonic tissue of the model organism and is required for maintaining the stem cell population and continuous progenitor function. However, its expression is absent in the developing organ of the model organism but present in the developing organ of this undercharacterized species. The contrasting morphologies of these two species have sparked considerable interest in elucidating the genetic factors and regulatory mechanisms underlying such variations. The key morphological differences that distinguish closely related species can be mediated by specialized cell types.

In this study, the initial focus centers on characterizing the cell populations present in the wild-type undercharacterized species using scRNA-seq technology to gain insights into the molecular basis of organ complexity and identify potential regulatory factors involved. By utilizing the capabilities of scRNA-seq, we aim to delineate and classify different cell types based on their unique gene expression profiles and establish a cellular taxonomy of the emerging model species. This crucial characterization step sets the stage for subsequent comparative analyses and lays the foundation for understanding the cellular composition and organization within the developing organ. However, applying single-cell transcriptomics in genetically underexplored species remains challenging due to the need for well-established marker genes to annotate the cell clusters. Another critical point to consider is that the transcriptomic profile of individual cells quantified by scRNA-seq may be a mixture of both gene expression signatures for cellular identity (identity GEP) and simultaneously occurring cellular activities (activity GEP). Characterizing the identity GEPs underlying cell type identity and the activity GEPs underlying cellular activities (e.g., cell cycle, stress response) is crucial for understanding the organization of cells and tissues. Inferring these GEPs remains challenging as scRNA-Seq data is noisy and high-dimensional, requiring computational approaches to uncover the underlying patterns. As more analysis tools are becoming available, it is becoming increasingly challenging to navigate this landscape and select an appropriate tool that can do both interpretation and analysis simultaneously.

NMF-based methods, such as the Liger tool, have demonstrated their effectiveness in integrating scRNA-seq datasets from diverse sources, enabling the identification of cell types across different samples or experimental conditions, and providing meaningful biological interpretation. I have adopted an advanced NMF-based technique called Liger to analyze the scRNA-seq data and unravel distinct cell types in this undercharacterized species. By applying the Liger tool to our dataset, we aim to identify robust cell-type clusters within the developing organ, ultimately providing a comprehensive understanding of the cellular heterogeneity within this complex tissue.

I have followed the common scRNA-seq analysis steps detailed in \_\_Documentation/Project_report.pdf\_\_. These steps include pre-processing (quality control, normalization, feature selection, gene-level scaling, and dimensionality reduction), data integration, and cell- and gene-level downstream analysis. With the inclusion of the basis matrix and the coefficient matrix, I have demonstrated the strength of the NMF methods in the biological interpretation of the data, such as the categorization of a large number of genes to a smaller set of coexpressed genes or GEPs, and the composition of cell clusters in terms of identity GEP and activity GEP. In the case of the underexplored organism, we lack a set of well-established markers for crucial cell types, and it becomes challenging to annotate cell clusters. Generating fluorescent reporter lines for many cluster-specific markers is technically challenging due to long generation times or low efficiency in transformation. Utilizing the Liger tool in this project, we have addressed some of the common difficulties in scRNA-seq data analysis, such as the assignment of cellular identity to the cell clusters, identification of cluster-specific markers, and removing confounding biological effects, such as the cell cycle effect without needing a prior list of genes and removing any cells. I further validated the cell clusters and identified cluster-specific markers by performing scRNA-seq data analysis using the Seurat tool.

This study is a pivotal starting point for our investigation into the differences in organ development between model organisms and undercharacterized species. This characterization of cell types lays the groundwork for subsequent exploring, where I delve deeper into the exploration of regulatory factors, such as the project-specific interested transcription factors, and their impact on the complex organ phenotype of this undercharacterized species.
